# Conventions Styles & The Right Way to Play Hanabi

## Introduction

Different groups who play Hanabi have different ideas about how the game should be played.

- Some groups believe that any form of communication before or after the game should be forbidden. This puts the emphasis of the game on trying to guess your teammate's intentions, similar to party games such as [_Codenames_](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/178900/codenames) or [_The Crew_](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/284083/crew-quest-planet-nine). Such groups, for example, often do not "allow" conventions like _Chop Focus_, since it prescribes a specific action that corresponds to an in-game event.
- However, most groups are a bit more relaxed, allowing people to ask questions like "what do you remember about your cards?" during the game to reduce the load on memory. Most groups also discuss strategy between games, and allow conventions that come up organically within the group for future games. For example, in the [Group Meta-Progression document](group-meta-progression.md), it is described how a lot of groups independently invent the same strategies such as _Finesses_ or _Bluffs_ over time.
- Rarely, some groups go to the other extreme. The [H-Group](https://hanabi.github.io/) has created a website that maps out 100+ strategies that were developed over many years. The history of how these conventions came to be is described in the [Convention Accumulation document](convention-accumulation.md).

One way of playing is not "better" than the other. Hanabi is a game, and players should play it however they find the most fun. Some groups want to play a social deduction party game, and that's okay. Other groups want to play a deep strategy game, and that's okay too. But there are some common misconceptions about three these "styles" that you should know before you neatly tuck yourself into one camp or the other.

## Chapter 1: The "No Convention" Impossibility

First, let's take a look at the people on the left-most side of the spectrum: those who think that any form of "convention" or "pre-game agreement" is cheating. This style works best with new groups. But it has a subtle pitfall when playing with the same people over and over again.

The human brain is one of the most advanced pattern-matching machines in the universe. We effortlessly and helplessly derive patterns from everything around us. And when you play Hanabi, you cannot turn this part of your brain off. You will notice patterns of behavior in your teammates and try to model them. For example: "A few games ago, when Bob was in trouble, he discarded when he had a known play. This seems a lot like that last situation, so maybe Bob is in trouble again." Even if you don't _explicitly_ think these kinds of things, you _implicitly_ will, as hard as you might try to stop it.

In this way, you could imagine that even if a group explicitly decides to _never_ discuss anything about the game, they could create conventions in a completely-accidental way. Everyone at the table would just instinctively know that when Bob is doing a certain kind of thing, he is in trouble. Will the players deliberately go against their instincts in order to preserve the "no convention" spirit of the game? Maybe, but that's going to be extremely difficult to do (or impossible) in the long term: there are hundreds of little signals that your teammates can subtly perform, and your pattern-matching brain is going to pick up on them.

For people who get "into" Hanabi and play with the same people over and over, it is important to realize that it really is impossible to play with "no conventions". It's okay if you think that the game is best played with "implicit conventions only" - that could be a fun meta-game for a group's progression. But the point here is that the distance between "implicit conventions only" and "some explicit conventions" is much less of a gap than some people in this camp would care to admit.

## Chapter 2: The Fallacy of "Logic-Only"

Even if we admit that playing with "no conventions" is impossible, it is not necessarily desirable to memorize a 100-page document filled with arbitrary conventions either. Is there some sweet spot between the two extremes?

Some people argue there is an objective delineation between "logical" moves like _Finesses_ (that can be derived from first principles) and arbitrary moves like [_Order Chop Moves_](https://hanabi.github.io/level-4/#the-order-chop-move-ocm) (that could have any arbitrary meaning). The most infamous supporter of this position is [Ben Smalls](https://boardgamegeek.com/user/smallman), who commonly asks for "logic-only" games. But this sentiment has been historically shared by many of the players who play a lot of Hanabi on [Board Game Arena](https://en.boardgamearena.com/), or BGA for short.

These people think that the best way to play Hanabi is with "logical conventions only". But what is the exact definition of a logical convention? In truth, this is a delineation that falls apart under closer scrutiny. Let's dive deeper.

### The Culture of Board Game Arena

BGA is interesting in that there are tons of players who play at all times of day. Thus, you may not have any idea who your teammates are, or what conventions they know, or how good they are at the game. And after the game is over, you might never play with those exact people again. (Although the [ELO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elo_rating_system) system ensures that expert players will get paired with each other more often.) The consequence of this is reflected in the culture of the website. People use some "special moves" like _Finesses_ and _Bluffs_, but they like to stick to moves that are really intuitive. It makes a lot of sense when you think about it: how are you going to spread a new, arbitrary convention to a thousand other strangers that are not organized in any formal way?

This "informalness" is compounded by the fact that the website is built in such a way that it is extremely tedious to review the game after it is finished. This leads to a culture where it is rare for the mistakes of the game to be reviewed. This is a shame, because a post-game review is often the best time to show someone a new, cool move that would "solve" the tricky situation that they were in. But even if the website had a great reviewing experience, it might still be a waste of time to go over your teammate's blunders with them, because you might never play with them again.

The evolution of BGA culture is exactly what you would naively expect, given the inputs to the system. It has led to the birth of hundreds of Hanabi players who grew up inside this system and fell in love with it. They argue that "the BGA way" is the perfect balance between the two extremes outlined in the introduction. When playing, your brain is always fully engaged, using logic and reason to figure out what to do for the current specific situation, because not much is prescribed. You don't have to memorize a lengthy list of conventions. And because of this, there is also huge space in which to improve your decision-making and become better at the game.

But BGA players can sometimes get a bit too zealous. Some come to believe that the BGA conventions are objectively "logical", because they have organically spread between thousands of players. This argument makes some sense: if a thing is easy to learn, intuitive, and spreads without any explicit guiding force, it stands to reason that it is "logical". But it is important to take a step back and look at BGA for what it really is: an accident of circumstance. If conventions are downstream of culture, and culture is downstream of a website's mechanics and popularity, then we could set up the historical pieces in a slightly different way and potentially get an entirely different convention set. And in that world, you would have hundreds of players arguing that these (different) conventions that "everybody" played with were "logical" and "correct".

### When Logicians Clash

Let's pose a hypothetical: what would happen if BGA players were forced to review their games? Would they agree about the "correct" logical action to perform at various critical points throughout the game? I think that a lot of players in the "logic-only" camp would agree that yes, they would.

But this situation is not relegated to a thought experiment, because it has happened in real life. A man named [Keldon Jones](http://keldon.net/) did not like the BGA implementation of the game, so in June 2013 he made his own version on his personal website. It was much easier to perform post-game reviews on Keldon's version, so the resulting culture that emerged on the website was that you reviewed every single game that you played. The players who played on the site had played on BGA before this, since it was the only other online implementation of the game. Thus, they already played the game in "the BGA way", more-or-less. So what happened?

It turns out that even when starting from the same "BGA-base" of _Finesses_ and _Bluffs_, players would agree on surprisingly little. It was extremely common for players to disagree about what a particular clue should mean. Alice would go first, explaining the context around the situation, and then laying out arguments for why the clue should be interpreted as a _Save Clue_. Bob would go next, explaining some different pieces of context, and then laying out arguments for why the clue should be interpreted as a _Play Clue_. Both sides were being "logical"; they just personally believed that one side was was the "obvious" interpretation and the points for the other side weren't very important. These debates would sometimes last up to half an hour at a time, becoming extremely technical and fine-grained.

And when discussing about what conventions to implement for future games, the same sorts of debates emerged. Alice would come out of a difficult game and propose a new convention, such that the same types of tricky situations (X) could be easily solved in the future. But Hanabi is complicated and has many different kinds of situations that are all subtly different. So Bob's intuition was that the convention would be harmful in some situations (Y and Z). From Alice's 1000 games of Hanabi, she experienced more of situation X than situation Y and Z, so from her perspective, the new convention was perfectly logical. But in Bob's 1000 games of Hanabi, he had experienced more of situations Y and Z than situation X, so from his perspective, the new convention was illogical.

In this kind of environment, you can kind of see how the distinction between "logic" and "arbitrary" becomes extremely blurred. Keldon's website shows us that when we zoom out and look at different Hanabi groups, the "logical convention" fallacy start to crumble. Take a move like a _Finesse_, which most would consider the quintessential example of a logical convention. It is indeed true that _Finesses_ are independently invented by most Hanabi groups. But not all Hanabi groups invent the _Finesse_. One of the members of the H-Group told me that before they got into playing online, they played a lot with their personal friend group in real life, and started developing conventions. And they invented a _Finesse_, but you played from the oldest slot instead of the newest slot! That may sound strategically unsound (since you want to get newer cards played more often), but they had other conventions to "get" new cards. Just imagine trying to tell this group that their version of the _Finesse_ was "illogical". They would laugh in your face!

If you find my historical retelling to not be very compelling, I encourage you to seek out and play a few games with Ben Smalls. Ben is notorious for berating players in post-game reviews for giving "wrong" clues that do not map on to his personal, convoluted chain of logic. It's the best wake up call in existence that "logic" is simply a synonym for "a thing that I personally find intuitive".

The actual end-game here is that it is impossible to delineate what a "logical" convention is. All you can say is that some conventions are more intuitive. But even "more intuitive" is fraught with danger, because different groups play with different base assumptions!

So when someone says that they like playing with conventions that are "logical" or that it is the best way to play Hanabi, I always encourage them to be a little bit more precise. The word "logic" is dripping with so much historical arrogance that it is anathema to a holistic discussion of the game.

## Chapter 3: Less-Structured Conventions vs More-Structured Conventions

The H-Group famously has [a website with over a hundred conventions](https://hanabi.github.io/). This is a lot of agreement on what clues mean. Thus, we could say that the H-Group is on the right-side of the spectrum with "more-structured conventions".

Players who prefer less structure recoil in disgust at this. Who would want to memorize a textbook worth of boring, arbitrary agreements just in order to play a casual card-game that is supposed to be about logic and deduction? And furthermore, with so many conventions, the game would be reduced to players robotically following a pre-determined flow chart. This would suck the life out of the game!

This cartoon picture of playing with the H-Group could not be further from the truth.

The first reason is the H-Group document is less rigid than it appears. Even though the H-Group defines what a clue "normally" means, good players always play with "high sensitivity", meaning that clues interpretations will change depending on the current context of the game. This is really fun! Even the official website [warns you about this](https://hanabi.github.io/level-12#context):

> Up until now, you may have the impression that the group has a lot of conventions, and that if you just memorize all of the conventions, you will become a really good Hanabi player. Or, you may have the impression that the conventions are like laws and that you must always follow them. Neither of these things are true...figuring out what a clue means is never truly as easy as following [a flowchart]!

More importantly, the H-Group conventions mostly focus on how to _interpret_ clues. In other words, when you give a clue, you probably know how it will be interpreted. But this still leaves a lot of room for the players to make decisions, because you have to decide _which_ clues to give! Thus, this framework enables a level of "cooperative puzzle-solving". By working with prior agreement on what clues "should" mean in the "usual" case, the focus shifts to planning and creativity, as expert players try to choreograph their way out of tight situations, make judgment calls about playing aggressively versus conservatively, and so on.

So, at a high level, we could say that both less-structured and more-structured games of Hanabi involve a lot of strategy and have a high skill ceiling. But they generally have different kinds of things that make them fun, and you should not arbitrarily discount the other one just because you grew up playing one or the other.
