---
id: 1
title: Puzzles for Level 1

---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Puzzle1A from '@site/image-generator/yml/puzzles/level-1/1A.yml';
import Puzzle1B from '@site/image-generator/yml/puzzles/level-1/1B.yml';
import Puzzle1C from '@site/image-generator/yml/puzzles/level-1/1C.yml';
import Puzzle1D from '@site/image-generator/yml/puzzles/level-1/1D.yml';
import Puzzle1E from '@site/image-generator/yml/puzzles/level-1/1E.yml';

## Puzzle 1A

<!-- lint disable no-undefined-references -->

<Tabs
  defaultValue="question"
  values={[
    {label: 'Puzzle 1A', value: 'question'},
    {label: 'Solution 1A', value: 'solution'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="question">

- Cathy clues number 2 to Alice, touching two brand new cards.
- Previously, Alice had no information about her hand.
- What notes should Alice write on her two cards?

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="solution">

- The focus of the clue is the leftmost card, since the chop is not touched.
- Since the clue is not chop-focused, it cannot be a save clue.
  Therefore, it must be a play clue.
- Alice looks around to see what 2's are playable right now.
- Alice sees that red 2, green 2, and purple 2 (through Bob's purple 1) are playable.
- But, the red 2 is already gotten in Bob's hand. Cathy should not give this clue if it would duplicate a card, so Alice rules out red 2.
- Hence, Alice writes the note "g2,p2" or her left 2.
- The 2 on the right could be any 2 that is not gotten yet.
- So, Alice writes the note "g2,p2,y2" on her right 2.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Puzzle1A />

## Puzzle 1B

<Tabs
  defaultValue="question"
  values={[
    {label: 'Puzzle 1B', value: 'question'},
    {label: 'Solution 1B', value: 'solution'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="question">

- Bob gives a blue clue to Alice, using up the last clue.
- Previously, Alice only knew that she had a green 1 and no other green cards.
- What notes should Alice write on her two cards?
- How should those notes change once Cathy moves?

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="solution">

- This clue *is* chop focused. Thus, it could be a play clue or save clue.
- If it is a save clue, it must be a blue 4. No other cards are eligible to be saved by color yet. (Blue 5 should be saved by number.)
- If it is a play clue, it could either be blue 2 or blue 3, by finessing the blue 2 in Cathy's hand.
  - The blue 3 in Bob's hand is irrelevant, since Bob gave the clue and cannot see his own cards.
- Thus, Alice should write blue 2, 3, 4 on her right blue card.
- The other blue card could be any of blue 2, 3, 4, 5 (but not blue 1, because of good touch).
- Alice should probably also make an "f" note now on Cathy's blue 2.
  - If Cathy blind-plays blue 2, then Alice knows for sure the right card is blue 3, and can play it.
  - Her other blue card will then be either blue 4 or blue 5.
  - If Cathy does not blind-play, then Alice's rightmost blue card could be either blue 2 or blue 4.
- This concludes the answer if we are following conventions like laws. However, if we think critically for a bit, we might realize which case it is.
  - Indeed, Cathy has no clues to spend and no cards to play. So unless Cathy blind-plays a card, she is going to discard. This would cause purple 5 to discard, losing the game!
  - Therefore, it would be really stupid for Bob to give a play clue to a blue 2 for Alice; he should save the purple 5 instead.
  - It would also be really stupid for Bob to save a blue 4 for Alice, because Alice was already going to play green 1 anyways. Saving the purple 5 is much more urgent.
  - So by chasing the logic, assuming Bob is thinking ahead, we should assume the blue 2 is going to blind-play next turn, and Alice has blue 3.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Puzzle1B />

## Puzzle 1C

<Tabs
  defaultValue="question"
  values={[
    {label: 'Puzzle 1C', value: 'question'},
    {label: 'Solution 1C', value: 'solution'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="question">

- Alice was previously given a 2 Save, so she has some marked 2's in her hand.
- Bob now gives the following green clue to Donald.
- What notes should Alice write?

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="solution">

- The clue to green 5 must be a play clue, because we save 5's by number.
- Therefore, Bob is promising the entire team that all the green cards are ready to play.
- Alice should now look around for the connecting green cards.
- Bob has a green 2, but it is irrelevant because Bob is the one making the promise. So, Alice must trust she has green 2.
- Alice is being asked to play her 2's from left to right until she finds green 2. For now, she should make a note on the left 2 saying it is green. If it turns out to not be green, then she would play the other 2.
- Alice can see a green 3 on Cathy's finesse position. So, that is the promised green 3. Alice marks Cathy's green 3 as finessed, highlighting the card in a light blue border.
- Alice can see a green 4 on Cathy's chop. But it is irrelevant, because Cathy would have no way of knowing it was there. Therefore, Alice must have green 4.
- None of Alice's clued cards match 4. So, Alice marks her leftmost unclued card as a finessed green 4 right now. (This way, she will not lose track of it later when she plays a card and her cards shuffle around.)
- Finally, Donald should know he has green 5. Alice makes a note that Donald should suspect his green card is exactly green 5, because he sees all the connecting cards.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Puzzle1C />

## Puzzle 1D

<Tabs
  defaultValue="question"
  values={[
    {label: 'Puzzle 1D', value: 'question'},
    {label: 'Solution 1D', value: 'solution'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="question">
It is the first turn of the game, with Alice to move.

- What are all the legal clues Alice can give?
- Of these, which clue is the best one?

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="solution">
At Level 1, the following is the list of all possible legal moves:

- Alice can give 5 to Cathy, as a *Save Clue*.
- Alice can give 1 to Bob, as a *Play Clue*.
- Alice can give 1 to Cathy, as a *Play Clue*.
- Alice can give 2 to Cathy, as a *Finesse*, causing Bob to blind-play the green 1. This is great.
- Alice can give **green to Cathy**, as a *Finesse*, causing Bob to blind-play the green 1. This is even better, because it also touches the green 4, meaning it gets one more card. This is the strongest move.

Note that Alice *cannot* give any of the following clues:

- Alice can not clue 2 to Bob as a *2 Save*, because the other green 2 is visible.
- Alice can not clue green to Bob, because it would be a *Play Clue* focused on the green 2 on chop, causing it to misplay.
- Alice can not clue yellow to Cathy, because it would be a *Play Clue* focused on the yellow 3, causing it to misplay.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Puzzle1D />

## Puzzle 1E

<Tabs
  defaultValue="question"
  values={[
    {label: 'Puzzle 1E', value: 'question'},
    {label: 'Solution 1E', value: 'solution'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="question">

- Donald had a known playable blue 3. Instead of playing it, he gives a yellow clue to Cathy, using up the second-to-last clue.
- Now, there is 1 clue left, and it is Alice's turn.
- What notes should Alice make after Donald's clue?
- What are all legal clues that Alice could give?
- Which of these legal clues is the strongest?

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="solution">

- Donald's clue focuses Cathy's chop. So, it is a promise the yellow 2 is playable right now.
- Alice looks around and sees the yellow 1 on Bob's finesse position. So, Alice marks the yellow 1 as finessed. Bob will play it next turn.
- Alice's legal options are:
  - Alice could clue 5 to Donald, but this is not very good since it appears to be a 5 Save.
  - Better yet, Alice could clue yellow to Donald, promising the yellow 5 is playable right now. Since the yellow 2 is already "locked in", Cathy would first play yellow 2, then play yellow 3 and yellow 4 from left to right, and finally let Donald play yellow 5.
  - Alice could clue red to Donald, as a play clue on red 1.
  - Alice could clue 2 to Cathy focusing the red 2, but this is not very good as it appears to be a 2 Save, although Cathy would know she has exactly red 2.
  - With Level 2 conventions, Alice would be better off if she clued red to Cathy, making it a play clue. This would cause a *Reverse Finesse* where Cathy would wait to see if Donald blind-plays. When he does, Cathy knows she has red 2.
  - With Level 2 conventions, even better is 3 to Bob. This would be a double *Reverse Finesse* which gets red 1 and red 2 to blind-play.
  - With Level 2 conventions, better still is red to Bob. This would again cause both red 1 and red 2 to blind-play, while also getting red 3 and red 4.
- The following clues are illegal:
  - Alice may not touch any of yellow 1, 2, 3, 4 as these are already gotten.
  - Alice may not clue 1 to Donald, since it bad touches purple 1.
- On the face of it, the red clue to Bob looks like the strongest one. It would get all four red cards to play with one clue.
  - However, before jumping to this conclusion, one might want to think what happens next.
  - By giving such a red clue, Alice would put Bob's green 5 on chop. Meanwhile, Donald has a 5 as well. Alice needs to make sure that her really efficient clue won't cause either card to discard! After all, she is using up the last clue.
- So, before giving the red clue, Alice should play out the next few turns in her head to make sure that this clue is safe.
  - On the next turn, Bob is going to blind-play.
  - On the next turn, Cathy will play yellow 2.
  - On the next turn, Donald would blind-play red 1.
  - It would now be Alice's turn again. So, Alice would discard, since she has no cards to play.
  - Now it is Bob's turn. Bob still would not have a card to play, but he has a great clue to give: Bob can be the one to give yellow to Donald, causing all yellow cards to play.
  - Cathy now plays yellow 3 based on Bob's clue.
  - Donald cannot play yellow 5 yet, so Donald discards. That is okay because he would discard the trash purple 1.
  - Now it is Alice's turn. She could, for example, now save the green 5. This has the bonus that Bob knows his other red card is red 4 exactly.
- Thus, the red clue is safe unless Alice has some important card on her chop. This is pretty unlikely since no one has told her about it, so this 4-for-1 clue is probably worthwhile to lock in.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Puzzle1E />
